https://www.openabm.org/model/4744/version/1/view

## WHAT IS IT?
## 
(a general understanding of what the model is trying to show or explain)

The Ethno-Cultural Tag artificial society model (ECT) is a variation of
cooperation producing tag models.

Full details can be found at: http://cfpm.org/discussionpapers/152 (by
Nov. 2015)

Ethnocentrism denotes behaviour and beliefs that are positive towards
those who share the same ethnicity and negative towards others. The
model considers short-term cultural evolution, where agents may interact
in a population and do not die or give birth but imitate and innovate
their behaviours. While agents retain a fixed ethnicity they have the
ability to form and join cultural groups and to change how they define
their in-group based on both ethnic and cultural markers (or tags).

Over a range of parameters cultural identity rather than ethnocentrism
becomes the dominant way that agents identify their in-group producing
high levels of positive interaction both within and between ethnicities.

However, in some circumstances, cultural markers of group preference are
supplemented by ethnic markers. In other words, whilst pure
ethnocentrism (based only on ethnic identity) is not sustained, groups
that discriminate in terms of a combination of cultural and ethnic
identities do occur.

In these less common cases, high levels of ethnocentric behaviours
evolve and persist – even though the ethnic markers are arbitrary and
fixed. Furthermore, cooperative ethnocentric groups do not emerge in the
absence of cultural processes. The latter suggests the hypothesis that
observed ethnocentrism in observed societies need not be the result of
long-term historical processes based upon ethnic markers but could be
more dependent upon short run cultural ones.


## HOW IT WORKS
## 
(what rules the agents use to create the overall behavior of the model)

Agents play a donation game - in which they decide if to unconditionally
help another agent (donate) or not (shirk). Donation incurs a cost
(parameter) and produces a benefit (parameter) to the receiver. From
this agents accumulate a payoff.

The donation rate (dr) is the proportion of games that result in such
help. The inter-ethnic donation rate (ie) is the proportion of donations
made that are made between agents with different ethnicities.

Agents store a cultural tag, an ethnic marker, a strategy and an
in-group selector. The tag, strategy and selector are culturally learned
(evolve) through imitation (replication) and innovation (mutation).
Agents imitate those who perform better than themselves in terms of
payoff. The ethnic marker is fixed and never changes.

The selector takes one of four values defining the in-group as either:
1) shared ethnic marker (se); 2) shared cultural tag (sc); 3) both (sb)
or 4) none (sn). The strategy takes one of four values either: 1) shirk
on all (ss); 2) donate to all (dd); 3) donate to in-group, shirk on
out-group (ds); 4) shirk on in-group, donate to out-group (sd). Tags
take one of number-of-tags (parameter) values.

Agents select game partners within their in-group (with probability
GIGB). They select others to imitate (learn from) within their in-group
(with probability LIGB). When GIGB = LIGB = 0 then agents interact with
the entire population. When GIGB = LIGB = 1 then agents only play games
or learn from agents within their in-group (as defined by their current
selector).

The model iterates through:

Interaction phase (agents play games with each other) Imitation phase
(agents imitate from those who got higher payoffs than themselves)
Innovation phase (agents probabilistically randomly mutate their tag,
strategy and selector)

## HOW TO USE IT
## 
(how to use the model, including a description of each of the items in
the Interface tab)

Press SETUP to initialise the population. Press "GO" to start the model
interations. Press GO again to stop the model.

Statistics are displayed showing the proportion of: donations (dr),
inter-ethnic donations (ie) and each of the strategy (ss, sd, ds, dd)
and selector (sn, sc, se, sn) types in the population. You can see how
they evolve over time.

The grid visualises the agents by putting them on a ring stacked. The
position on the ring indicates the agent tag value. The hight of the
stack indicates how many agents share the tag (i.e. the size of the
cultural group). The colours indicate the strategy type of the agent.

## THINGS TO NOTICE
## 
Either sc or sb selector tend dominate often competing and changing
places as dominant in-group selector. Strategy ds tends to dominate
meaning agents learn to only donate to their in-group. Tag groups
constantly form and decay producing a cooperative ecology of cultural
groups.

Notice that pure ethnic in-group selectors (se) rarely gain any
signficant hold in the population meaning that agents do not define
their in-groups solely with reference to the ethnic marker.

## THINGS TO TRY
## 
Try increasing and reducing the number of agents. How does this effect
the dynamics of groups and donation rate (dr)?

Changing the GIGB and LIGB values often produces radically different
behaviour. Donation (dr) is highest when GIGB = 1 and LIGB = 0 (meaning
play games only with in-group but learn from everyone).

What happens when the number-of-tags is reduced so it's less than the
number of agents? Why? Note: you can increase and decrease the
number-of-tags while the simulation is running - you don't need to
restart the simulation.

Notice also that mutation rates on the tag have to be >> mutation on the
strategy to create high cooperation. This is because it allows for
cooperative new cultural groups (containing DS agents) to be created
more quickly than they are dissolved (due to being invaded by shirkers
through innovation of agent strategies).

## EXTENDING THE MODEL
## 
The model could be extended by:

- Changing the game so agents could chose to punish as well as donate or
shirk. Punishment would incur both a cost to the punisher and the
punished. Would agents learn to punish their out-groups?

- Placing agents in space or network and modify interaction rules to
bias interaction towards neighbours

- Incorporating movement / network rewiring to create a dynamic social
structure

- Dynamically changing to number of ethnicities in the population
through introduction of new agents into the population over time

## RELATED MODELS
## 
Hales, D. (1998) Stereotyping, Groups and Cultural Evolution: A Case of
"Second Order Emergence"? In Sichman, J., Conte, R., & Gilbert, N.
(Eds.) Multi-Agent Systems and Agent-Based Simulation. Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence 1534. Berlin: Springer-Verlag

Hales, D. (2001) Cooperation without memory or space: Tags, groups and
the prisoner's dilemma. In S. Moss & P. Davidsson (Eds.),
Multi-Agent-Based Simulation, 1979, 157-166.

Hammond, R. & Axelrod, R. (2006). The Evolution of Ethnocentrism.
Journal of Conflict Resolution, December 2006, 50: 926-936,
doi:10.1177/0022002706293470

See built-in netlogo model library: sample models/social
science/ethnocentrism

## CREDITS AND REFERENCES
## 
Full details of the model and results can be found in:

Hales, D. & Edmonds, B. (2015) Culture trumps ethnicity! –
Intra-generational cultural evolution and ethnocentrism in an artificial
society. Centre for Policy Modelling Discussion Paper CPM 15-226,
Manchester, UK. http://cfpm.org/discussionpapers/152 (by Nov. 2015)